[MUSIC PLAYING]
[VOICES ECHOING]
>> Why are we here?
What is my life about?
Why is there life at all?
What's going on,
and why am I here?
[BOOMING]
>> What is the real reality?
>> Where do we come from?
>> Look at quantum physics.
[INTERPOSING VOICES]
>> Supreme mind.
>> The brain does not know the
difference between what it sees
in its environment
and what it remembers.
>> We are running a Holodeck.
>> Whatever way we observe
the world around us--
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Beautiful, clean.
Clean.
>> The rabbit hole and how deep
and how far we want to go is
really how far, how much do
you want to discover about
your true nature?
>> Anybody who spends so much
time trying to explain it is
likely to get lost forever
down the rabbit hole
of mysteriousness.
>> What becomes real?
Is it our body?
Is it our cumulative genetics?
Is it how we look?
Is it how we walk?
Is it how much we
weigh or don't weigh?
>> What we're going to do
with that knowledge and how
we're going to speculate
and examine possibilities
and potentials to ask the
big questions-- what if?
What would it be like?
How would it be?
The moment we ask
those questions,
it forces the brain
to begin to fire
in new sequences
and new patterns.
It breaks the routine.
>> I was basically trying
to find the answers to what
I've often called those four
great questions that everybody
faces whether they
realize it or not,
even the agnostics
and the atheists,
as well as the
believers and the pious.
And that is, who are we?
Where do we come from?
What should we do?
And where are we going?
And if you don't answer
those four great questions,
obviously your life
is pretty meaningless.
And many people just stuff
those questions down,
and they want the
answers made for them,
or they want
somebody like Jesus,
or Krishna, or Buddha,
or somebody else
to do it for them.
It can't be done.
It's like wanting someone
to be born for you,
or to die for you, or to
eat your lunch for you.
These things are
inescapably personal.
>> What is truth?
What is lasting truth?
What is really important to you?
>> Questions about whether the
world really looks anything
like we take it to look or
whether this is just something
that's radically altered
by being filtered through
our perspective,
so on and so forth.
These are questions
which I take it everybody
has a natural curiosity about.
These are questions-- these
are the sorts of questions
that thinking about them is
what makes life interesting.
>> Physics of mind,
physics of thought.
What is a thought?
What's it made of?
Is it made of anything?
Does it have its own
independent reality?
>> So these are the kind of
things that we have to ask
about.
These are some of the questions
that quantum physicists
and so forth are looking at
and some of the questions
that researchers of
consciousness studies
are looking at to try
to uncover and unravel
what is human consciousness
and how we make sense of it.
>> Why are we here?
Well, that is the ultimate
question, isn't it?
By we, I assume you
mean consciousness,
conscious beings.
That's we.
So why is consciousness here?
>> Do we really think we've used
the mass of our brain power?
We think we've really reached
the depth of our intelligence?
That would be an insult to us.
We're really great beings.
>> Where do we end?
Where do we end and the
rest of the world begin?
How come we are--
how come we feel separate
when we aren't separate?
And of course, one
of the big questions
is, if everything is mutable
and reality isn't set,
well, how come it feels solid?
>> The question really is,
what is God doing to make
a universe?
>> Oh, god.
When we ask the great
questions, something amazing
happens in our mind.
We have to stop the routine
way in which we think.
We have to stop
allowing the environment
to turn on the
circuits in our brain
that cause us to think the
repetitive patterns that we
are so in the habit of
thinking on a daily basis.
To ask the great questions
is to be an inspiration.
It's to stop the moving
locomotive of our life.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Are all realities
existing simultaneously?
Is there a possibility that all
potentials exist side by side?
Have you ever seen yourself
through the eyes of someone
else that you have become--
and looked at yourself
through the eyes
of the ultimate observer?
>> So the film asks, how far
down the rabbit hole do you
want to go?
Remember that Alice went down
the rabbit hole following
where she met the Mad Hatter.
The Hatter was mad.
Now, hatters became mad
from mercury poisoning.
And the idea is you want to
get out of the rabbit hole
after you've gone in.
So there's two
stages to science.
There's the crazy part, where
you go down the rabbit hole,
and then there's
the part where you
check the craziness
of your ideas
against a rigorous, strict,
straitjacket-like process.
>> I think the interesting
thing about science,
the interesting thing
about physics is that it is
a genuinely new and novel way
of trying to come to grips with
the world.
I think the experimental method
which is important to physics
is a very different business
from the method of revelation
or the method of meditation,
or something like that.
I don't think it's true that,
for example, adherents of, say,
Buddhism could imagine
changing their beliefs based
on the outcomes of
some experiments people
do with electrons.
>> Why this apparent rift
between the Church and science
or between science and
religion emerged today,
I think the roots of
that are very deep.
>> Is News Real films
presents exciting news.
Is the divorce over?
Are spirit and science
tying the knot once more?
Are the Church
and the laboratory
saying the same thing?
Out of the misty
ages of antiquity,
the quest for the
divine and the quest
for knowledge about the
universe marched hand in hand.
Ancient Sumer-- there
was a god of astronomy,
a god of horticulture,
a god of irrigation.
And the temple priests were
the scribes and technologists
investigating these
fields of knowledge.
Ancient Greece, philosophers
asking the questions
of why are we here,
develop the theory
of the atom, celestial
movements, and human ethics.
Medieval Europe--
the Western church
arose to a position
of supreme power.
Kingmaker, landowner,
and purveyor
of the truth, the Church
took it upon themselves
to be the one knower
of everything.
The dogma was law.
>> Because it probably goes
back to a conviction that some
of the books of the scriptures,
like the Book of Genesis which
deals with beginnings, is
actually telling us about
the origins of the world.
Now, in fact, any biblical
scholar will tell you--
and this is not news--
that the Book of
Genesis was never
meant to be about the
origins of the world.
But many churchmen believed
that in the Book of Genesis
you had actual
sort of live news,
like CNN, about the
beginnings of creation.
And therefore you had many
people down through the ages,
like the famous Archbishop
James Ussher in Ireland in 1650,
who calculated all the ages
of the patriarchs back along
and worked out to
his own satisfaction
that the creation of the world
occurred in the year 4004
BC on the 17th of September
at 9 o'clock in the morning.
>> Yet science had moved forward
and now challenged the dogma
that the Earth was the
center of the universe.
Copernicus, Bruno,
and Galileo all
felt the heavy
hand of the Church.
The tragedy-- unable to
suppress science anymore,
the Church and
science divided up
knowledge and human endeavor.
Descartes invented dualism.
The Church had the
unseen, science the seen.
And materialism was born.
>> Descartes invented dualism
to avoid the problem between
the Church and science.
>> A long time ago, we made
the decision to separate sort
of spirit from science
and that science--
and we were in this
low asymmetry state.
Because there, the
effects of most humans,
of their consciousness,
is very small.
And so we were able to
learn how to do science.
But now we've
learned, and now we
can take on the richer task
of learning to do science
when consciousness,
a significant amount
of consciousness, is
part of the experiment.
>> And uneasy truths.
Scientists were no
longer being bound,
and they reacted
with a vengeance.
All the unseen is
fantasy, delusion.
We are strictly little
machines running
in a predictable machine
universe governed
by strict, immutable laws.
The Church pushed back.
Soulless scientists
were condemned to hell.
>> Back in the 17th century,
we came out of a period of time
where we saw the
universe as this living,
vibrant entity to that of
the world as a machine.
And with that
scientists came along
such as Descartes and Newton,
which solidified that concept,
because they were describing
science and mathematics
of a non-living world
of inanimate objects
and did some very
beautiful calculations,
and enhanced our understanding
of non-living systems.
Descartes really looked
at the world as a machine.
He was very
interested in clocks.
The problem is is they
applied this model
of a clock or a wind-up toy
soldier to living systems
as if we understood the parts,
the different components
of the system well
enough we would
understand how the system
works, as in a clock.
>> The key underlying assumption
that most scientists still work
under is that we live in
a clockwork universe--
we live in a
mechanistic universe
that is conceived of
as gears and knobs
sort of linking together.
That is going to change because
we know that that is not true.
We know from a physics
point of view it's not true.
The impact of that change
is still somewhat difficult
to guess, but one
of the areas that I
know is going to
make a big impact
is in how we understand the
nature of human experience,
because human experience in a
clockwork world doesn't fit.
And that's why in mainstream
psychology for many years
the very idea of an
internal experience
was considered to be laughable.
There was no
internal experience.
It was explained away.
And the reason it
was explained away
is because of this idea of
living in a clockwork world.
>> Darwin countered the
creator's nothing, nowhere.
We are random mutations,
simply a carrier
of DNA's relentless quest for
more in a meaningless universe.
And meanwhile, both science and
religion were hitting the wall.
If everything was mechanistic
and God was the only creator,
then what were we
humans supposed to do?
Science dug ever deeper
into a dead universe
and stumbled upon and
unlocked a mystery.
>> In the material
way of thinking,
what happens is that we
always shortchange ourselves
because we cannot understand
love, justice, or even meaning.
So we think that the
world is meaningless,
love and justice are
figments of our imagination
which has no meaning
in the first place.
>> It seems that on
the one hand, say,
physics is going to be
urging that we look at people
as if they were
mechanical devices.
And other kinds of
discourses we have
about love, about literature,
about art, something like that
are going to be
asking us to look
at people in a very
different way than that.
And I'm interested
at the point at which
those two bang into each other.
I'm interested in the points at
which those two points of view
that one can take on the world
come into conflict with one
another, come into
collision with one another.
And I'm interested in
studying those collisions.
>> In tiny corners
of space and time,
scientists found unfathomable
energy and mind-numbing
mysteries--
mysteries that suggest
we are all connected,
that the physical universe
is essentially non-physical.
Time and space are
just constructs
of this non-materialness.
>> I think that by looking at
where this intersection between
science and religion is is going
to be our best way of really
being able to address those
issues and to go ahead and do
science appropriately and
morally and respectfully
but also preserve who we are
as human beings because while
science can do a lot
of things for us,
it still doesn't necessarily
change who we are as human
beings, which probably is the
ultimate reason why we have
our problems.
>> Bringing mind and matter back
together again is not so easy
to do.
We've-- the problem is we've
been trained so well in science
to work with the idea that mind
is outside of science that we
don't have any way of testing
to find mind in science.
>> I understand the objection
from physicists who say that
trying to link the spookiness
of quantum mechanics
to the slipperiness of psychic
phenomena is illegitimate.
And my response is that I
understand the objection.
One is mathematically
precise and able
to be replicated easily
in the laboratory,
and the other one
is very slippery is
full of psychological
complexities and all kinds
of stuff including a history
of charlatanism and imbeciles
and all kinds of stuff.
It's clear that that's
there, so, of course,
you wouldn't-- you'd want to
stiff arm the competition.
On the other hand,
you look clearly
at what is the fundamental thing
that both of these realms say.
They're talking about a
form of interconnectedness.
>> And today, renegade
scientists are meeting with
religious leaders.
Conferences pushing forward a
meeting of science and spirit
are springing up as the
20th century blew open
the doors of a mechanistic view.
Will the 21st century
blow down the iron wall
between the church
and laboratory?
This is your Is News Real
reporter signing off.
>> I think that there must
be a scientific explanation
for spirituality.
I don't think there's been
a good one until recently.
To me, the only one
that makes sense
is that proto consciousness,
platonic values, goodness,
truth exist at this fundamental
level of spacetime geometry,
which can influence our
actions if we're open to them,
and interconnects us to all
other beings to the universe
at large.
>> It's time to get wise.
>> Science creates the stories
that we live by, and science
has told us a very bleak story.
It's told us that we're some
sort of genetic mistake,
that we have genes
that use us basically
to move on to the
next generation,
and that we randomly mutate.
It's said that we are
outside of our universe,
that we are alone,
that we are separate,
and that we are this
sort of lonely mistake
on a lonely planet
in a lonely universe.
And that informs our
view of the world.
It informs our
view of ourselves.
And we're now realizing
that this view,
this view of
separateness, is one
of the most destructive things.
It's the thing that creates
all the problems in the world.
>> It's time to get wise.
>> And we're now realizing
that that paradigm is wrong,
that we aren't separate.
We are all one.
We're all together.
At the very nether most element
of our being, we are connected.
And so we're under-- trying
to understand and absorb what
are the implications of that.
What does this really
mean to me in my life?
>> We need a new
spiritual milieu.
We need a new spiritual
way of understanding
the nature of what it
is to be a human being
because the old ways, the old
mythologies, the old monarchy
king, god versus the old
lawful scientist way of doing
everything are dead.
They need to be buried.
We need a new
realm, a new vision,
and I think quantum
physics if anything
could help us get a step
up in the right direction.
>> One of the reasons why
among them is a wide variety
of things that I
could have done,
that I settled on psychic
phenomenon is because I
convinced myself through my
own experiments and through
watching the experiments of
others that these effects are
real.
And if they are
real, then it means
that the large bulk of
science has completely
sidestepped something of
profound interest and probably
profound importance.
Because anytime science
has ignored something
or partitioned off
this area of the world
we're not going to
look at, it means
that we're not getting a
comprehensive view of reality.
>> Every civilization is a
reflection of its knowledge.
Civilization is based upon
knowledge, the prevailing
paradigm.
Now you look at the globe today,
our rainbow-colored globe,
you see arbitrary divisions
among nations, among peoples.
These are completely
random, completely arbitrary
based upon who owned at what
period of time in history.
But if somebody in
the future looks back
upon our globe of
today, they're going
to say this is a fragmented
world based upon a fragmented
worldview.
>> There was a quite
noticeable shift in the thrust
of the teachings of Jesus from
say the teachings of the Old
Testament.
For instance, he
said it was said
to the man of old, quoting
Moses, an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a
tooth, but I say
to you forgive your enemies.
And he always stressed how
important that thought was.
>> In the new paradigm, it would
be certainly a lot different
than it is now.
We-- I'm just thinking
of how any garbage that
comes into anyone's
mind, any garbage
is strewn out onto the airwaves.
Children grew up hearing
garbage, playing garbage.
And every time you take an
extreme view, every time
a little man kills another
little man in a computer game,
something has changed in
the brain of that kid.
>> Anytime a worldview changes,
it will affect behavior.
It affects society.
It affects economy.
Everything reflects the sense
of what the worldview is.
So if we imagine the worldview
as a giant machine that's
there to be exploited, then
that's the way we'll do.
That's what will happen.
That's the way we'll operate.
That's why business
goes crazy sometimes
because the nature of the game
is get as much as you can.
Once-- if that changes,
probably the closest parallel
I can think of is
the ecology movement.
Before an ecology
movement, the notion
of sustainability,
of rare resources,
of paying attention to the world
as an organism was laughable,
and we saw the-- we still
see the effects worldwide
when people don't pay
attention to the fact
that we have a-- we're
living in a closed space.
There's a limited
amount of stuff to use.
That makes a big difference.
So how will it make a
difference if people
imagine that the ecology
extends into the mind?
Well, it might be kind of
a closed space there, too.
You start making it
dirty and putting
in bunch of bad stuff
in there, you're
going to end up with a
bad mind environment.
>> I believe that the
children are our canaries,
and they are like the canaries
in the mines that were keeling
over to warn the miners
that they better get out.
I think some of the things we're
seeing with the children today
is a sign that the culture
is in the wrong paradigm
and not appreciating
the power of thought.
>> It may very well be that
what's going on inside of you
in your brain, in
your nervous system,
in your nature of
observation how memory works,
how mind works, it may very well
be that what is happening there
is some kind of observer matter
interrelationship which is
indeed making
things real for you,
affecting how you
perceive reality.
It's not changing that
reality out there.
You're not changing big
chairs and big trucks
and bulldozers and
rockets taking off.
You're not changing those.
No.
But you're changing
how you perceive things
and maybe how you
think about the things,
how you feel about things,
how you sense the world.
>> The infinite information that
the brain is processing every
single second tells us that
there's more to the world than
we're perceiving.
However, every single time
we're immersed in an experience
with our senses--
seeing, smelling,
tasting, feeling--
as we're immersed
centrally in our reality.
>> We know nothing
about reality,
and all of our sense of
so-called reality out there is
filtered through
our sense organs.
>> The brain processes 400
billion bits of information
a second, but we're only
aware of 2,000 of those.
That means that reality
is happening in the brain
all the time.
>> You should try it.
How do I know what I'm doing?
I and the vase are one.
Hey, might help your work, too.
>> I live through my eyes.
Alternative reality.
>> Not just some
nebulous nothing,
touchy feely world of
shifting whatevers.
>> If it's real,
I want to see it.
>> Reality, what a concept.
>> What is reality, and
is it ever knowable?
>> The easy answer to the
question as to whether reality
is itself is illusory and it's
really all fuzzy and it's all
just probabilities, the easy
answer to that would be yes.
So if I were hurrying
off to a meeting
instead of being interviewed
and somebody came up to me
and pestered me on the street
and asked that question and I--
say, yes, yes, that's
basically right.
But it's more complicated
than that because
at the moment that you
interact with reality,
it does then come
into absolutely
rock solid existence.
It's only fuzzy when you're
not interacting with it.
>> When we look at some of
the modern scientific views
of reality that have
tried to get down, down,
down to the nitty gritty, we
see that at its ultimate level
saying in theory or string
theory that reality is not
solid.
It's mostly empty space.
And whatever solidity
it has seems more
to resemble a hologram
picture rather than
material harsh solid reality.
It's a shimmering
reality that seems
to be very susceptible
to the power of thought.
>> Its very powerful mystical
experiences are perceivers
to represent a truer form of
reality and more fundamental
levels of reality that makes
this material world really not
mean as much.
Some people will describe
it as an illusion, which
I think is sometimes
a little strong,
but I think the point
they're trying to make
is that it just doesn't
have the realness,
the quality of realness,
that these states have.
And the ultimate goal
of the mystic then,
once they've had
that experience,
is to keep trying to get
back to that experience
because that is
in their eyes what
represents the fundamental
level of reality.
>> We have to go beyond
our senses to create a new
paradigm.
Our senses determine everything
that exists in our world,
but that doesn't
necessarily mean
that's the end of our world.
We have to embrace knowledge
that's unconventional,
that's in the unseen.
And if we can wire it
in our brain first,
then what has always existed
will now be seen by us.
That's the paradigm shift.
>> You ever close your eyes
when you're making love.
>> The eyes are like the lens,
but the tape that's really
seeing is the back of the brain.
It's called the visual cortex.
It's right back here.
It's like this
camera, this tape.
>> And the eyes are in some
senses a camcorder because they
are taking that information
and they're storing it,
but they're not-- you're not
really able to get it to mean
anything until you actually
put it all together.
So in some senses, it
requires the editor's table
to really put the
whole thing together,
to put the movie together of
what your life and your world
is actually about.
>> The only movie that's playing
in the brain is what we have
the ability to see.
So is it possible
our eyes, our cameras
see more than what our
brain has the ability
to consciously project?
>> Well, the way our
brain is wired up,
we only see what we
believe is possible.
We match patterns that
already exist within ourselves
through conditioning.
So a wonderful story
that I believe is true
is that when the Indians,
the Native American
Indians on the
Caribbean Islands saw
Columbus' ships
approaching, they
could see them at all because
it was so unlike anything they
had ever seen before.
They couldn't see it.
>> If I get out of bed in the
morning and I suddenly decide
to take very
seriously the claim,
which is surely a true claim,
that I don't know for sure
if my eyes are working correctly
so that for all I know even
though it looks like there
is a stable floor by the side
of my bed, there might be a
cliff or something like that.
If I am unable to order
those possibilities in terms
of probabilities that
I assign to them,
then I'm not going
to get out of bed.
Seems to me I'm paralyzed in the
most literal sense of the word.
I'm not-- I'm going to have
no idea how to literally take
the next step.
It's definitely the
case that we know
that my eyes might in principle
be deceiving me at any moment.
We've had experience of
people before subject
to hallucinations, and
even if we didn't, we
don't know how to prove
as a fundamental matter
that our eyes never deceive us.
That's absolutely right.
But when we make the decision to
get out of bed in the morning,
we are assigning probabilities
to the various hypotheses
compatible with my seeing
a floor by the bed.
One hypothesis is there
really is a floor there,
and that's why I'm seeing it.
Another hypothesis is my seeing
the floor is a hallucination
and there's a cliff there.
By getting out of
bed in the morning,
you endorse one of those
hypotheses as more likely
than another.
>> When Columbus' armada
landed in the Caribbean,
none of the Natives were able to
see the ships even though they
existed on the horizon.
The reason that they
never saw the ships
was because they
had no knowledge
in their brains or no experience
that clipper ships existed.
So the shaman starts to
notice that those ripples out
in the ocean, but
he sees no ship.
But he starts to wonder
what's causing the effect.
So everyday he goes out and
looks and looks and looks,
and after a period of time,
he's able to see the ships.
And once he sees the ships,
he tells everybody else
that ships exist out there.
Because everybody trusted
and believed in him,
they saw them also.
>> By getting out of
bed in the morning,
you endorse one of those
hypotheses is more likely than
another.
That's the way we're
used to proceeding
in our ordinary lives.
Why are you doing that?
You have all kinds of memories.
>> We always perceive something
after reflection in the meter
of memory.
>> If I were to use a little
bit of poetic license and say,
well, would happen if we could
actually tap into the different
parts of the processing
steps of the visual--
of how we actually
develop vision,
the information, of course,
first strikes our eyes
and strikes the retina.
But that information that
creates certain nerve
signals that then connect
back to the primary parts
of the brain where the
images really begin
to form in the very basic--
the primary visual cortex as
it's called, what we would see
is something a
little bit like this
where we're basically
just talking
about lines, shapes, colors.
There's nothing really
there that we can actually
identify or see or
even talk about,
and we're certainly not
conscious of this level
of activity.
So this is really
just the raw data
upon which is coming
in to the world,
but we can't make
any sense of that.
So in that regard, vision
itself doesn't really
occur in the eyes.
It doesn't even
occur necessarily
in the primary visual
area, but if we
start to go up in
terms of the processing
when we get to a secondary
level of processing,
we're beginning to
coalesce forms and shapes.
We may be somewhat conscious
of this state, which is maybe
associated with something called
blind sight where people don't
have that highest level
of processing where
we see the vivid world
because consciously they
say I can't see.
But if you ask them to guess
what they're looking at
or to navigate through a
room with objects in it,
they can usually do
so reasonably well as
if they can see.
So what's going on we
don't know for sure,
but it seems that
there's a disconnection
between the secondary and this--
the final level of processing.
So we have some
degree of awareness,
but it's still not really
that clear vivid rendition
of reality.
And that doesn't
happen until we get up
to the final stages of
our processing, which
is in what's called the
visual association area.
And when we see
that, this is where
we would see this very
vivid picture of what
the world is about.
We see all the colors.
We see everything as if we can
perceive it to be very real.
And not only do we have this
very real perception of it,
but again these association
areas as they're
called because they associate
different pieces of information
across the brain, connect this
picture with memory banks,
and if this is a
picture of a dog,
it makes-- we
identify it as a dog.
We may have an emotional
response to it.
If we love dogs, then we
have a warm fuzzy feeling.
And if we don't
like dogs, then we
may not like this
kind of a picture.
So it depends on what
you're actually--
what your experiences have
been and how you ultimately
process the information
that really does create
for you your visual world.
So the brain itself
is really what
is doing all of your sensing.
Conversely, the thing
that I've always
been fascinated about on
just a very simplistic level
is that when you stub
your toe walking--
when you bang into
something, your toe hurts.
But it's really
hurting in your brain,
and it's your brain that
actually perceives the hurt.
But you feel it all the
way down in your toe.
>> The experiment with
the upside down glasses.
This man Slater
built these glasses
made of prisms and lenses
so that you saw things
upside down.
And he had a group of
people wear these glasses,
and he asked them to
sustain wearing them.
It was very
uncomfortable for them
because they saw people
walking upside down.
But if they kept the glasses on,
then after two to three weeks,
depending upon the individual,
that with the glasses
on-- flip--
they saw everything
right side up.
And if they took the
glasses off at that point--
flip-- they'd see
things upside down.
So what happens,
the way I interpret
that is that the mindset was
so strong that people walk
right side up, that
with the glasses on,
that mindset created a force
to cause the neural dendrites
to grow in such a way as
to create an inversion
mirror in the brain.
And then once that hard
wired structure was built
and you take the
glasses off, now it
has to dissolve that structure
in order to see things the way
you expect to see them.
It's called neural learning now.
We do it all the time.
And I think that's
the way it goes.
The dilemma is people don't
manifest a lot of these things
because their mindset.
The mindset of our world says
that we can't do those things.
Those things aren't real.